

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 1 of 21
Market Guide for Cloud, Extended Planning and
Analysis Solutions
Published 29 July 2021 - ID G00739810 - 29 min read
By Analyst(s): Robert Anderson, Greg Leiter
Initiatives:Finance Applications; Supply Chain Planning
Cloud xP&A heralds a transformation of financial planning and
analysis via a single platform with the integration and services
needed for finance and business teams to collaborate. Application
leaders should use this market guide to match their organization’s
requirements to vendor capabilities.
Overview
Key Findings
Recommendations
Application leaders responsible for finance applications should:
Extended planning and analysis (xP&A) is the next generation extension of financial
planning and analysis (FP&A) solutions and is a vendor response to the challenges
faced by enterprises seeking to exploit new digital business models and navigate
current and future economic uncertainties.
■
Although best-of-breed (BoB) operational planning solutions, such as workforce and
sales and operations planning (S&OP) will remain popular, FP&A will begin to
incorporate more of these functional capabilities as it evolves into xP&A (a platform-
centric approach capable of supporting and integrating both financial and
operational planning).
■
xP&A solutions are immature and, as a result, may be lacking in functional depth
and breadth and fairly costly compared to FP&A solutions.
■
Meet with business stakeholders to determine if xP&A can streamline and enhance
enterprise planning by analyzing current enterprise planning strategies and
processes.
■

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 2 of 21
Strategic Planning Assumption
Through 2024, 30% of FP&A implementations will be extended to support operational
finance processes with 50% requiring a substantial xP&A roadmap from the vendor.
Market Definition
xP&A is the evolution of planning, combining financial and operational planning on a
single composable platform. It “extends” traditional FP&A solutions focused solely on
finance into other enterprise planning domains such as workforce, sales, operations and
marketing. These early maturity market solutions offer reference architectures, proprietary
data models, configurable applications and other capabilities enabling the integration and
alignment of financial and operational plans. xP&A seeks to provide better informed and
timely decision making to meet tactical and strategic objectives.
Market Description
Modern initiatives seeking to establish digital sales channels and business models amid
business disruption must be supported by collaborative and agile planning and
performance management processes, so feedback can be received, analyzed and acted
on sooner. Surmounting these challenges will require organizations to plan in a more
consistent, cross-functionally aligned, collaborative, agile and accurate manner as they
seek to pivot quickly and gain competitive advantage.
xP&A is a vendor response to these evolving enterprise planning needs. They help
organizations exploit the challenges faced when introducing new digital business models
and navigating economic uncertainties (see Figure 1). Solutions introduced in the market
are capable of merging together financial and operational planning processes, so
management improves decisions and delivers better results across the enterprise.
Identify vendor solutions, approaches and capabilities by utilizing this market guide
to understand the level of xP&A support provided.
■
Obtain funding and approval for integrating and consolidating planning tools using
xP&A by creating a business case and strategic roadmap for enterprise planning that
targets applicable improvement opportunities, based on level of importance, risk and
ROI.
■

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 3 of 21
Figure 1: Before and After xP&A
Currently, the primary customers for xP&A solutions are those having already deployed a
cloud FP&A solution wishing to extend their solution to gain additional value. FP&A
solutions have traditionally been used by the finance organization alone, disconnected
and unintegrated with operational metrics. That limitation often inhibited and impeded
finance, operations and human capital management leaders from taking a broader
approach to enterprise performance management. While still in the early maturity stage
(see  Hype Cycle for CRM Sales Technology, 2021), the cloud xP&A market is evolving
quickly to overcome and address these challenges. Customers that have deployed FP&A
solutions are seeking and demanding ways to use their platform investment to extend and
align planning more broadly beyond finance to the broader enterprise.
Examples of xP&A vendor developments going deeper in scope that “extend” the ability of
FP&A to connect to, integrate with, and align with operational plans include:
Improved planning platform architecture to support increased composability via
intelligent, guided plan modelling tools and performance improvements capable of
handling larger data volumes and granularity required for both financial and
operational planning applications.
■
Artificial intelligence/machine learning (AI/ML) capable of quickly identifying
significant patterns and anomalies across large integrated finance and operational
datasets.
■

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 4 of 21
Although BoB operational planning solutions will remain popular, FP&A will begin to
incorporate some of their capabilities as it evolves into xP&A — a platform-centric
approach capable of supporting and integrating both financial and operational planning.
By extending FP&A and other planning applications beyond the finance domain to other
key business stakeholders, xP&A can offer decision makers a holistic view of their
planning processes, results and progress toward fulfilling a strategy and meeting an
organization’s goals.
Market Direction
Gartner’s 2021 Extended Planning and Maturity Analysis Research Circle survey found
that 96% agreed that a majority of enterprises will adopt a planning strategy to
integrate/align FP&A with one or more operational planning areas by 2024. The majority
of respondents were either team members or held primary responsibility for operational or
financial planning. As the velocity of digital business — and the amount of associated
data — increases, Gartner expects the xP&A approach to gain momentum, thus increasing
its importance to all C-level executives. Gartner estimates that, through 2024, 30% of FP&A
implementations will be extended to support operational finance processes, with 50%
requiring a substantial xP&A roadmap from the vendor. Gartner has seen a rapid increase
in the number of client organizations seeking to integrate and link financial and
operational planning processes wherever possible.
Despite this, most functions in the year ahead will still independently select their own BoB
planning solutions or use Microsoft Excel spreadsheets, often resulting in a siloed
landscape without consistency of purpose. While many attempts have been made over
the years to successfully integrate FP&A with operational planning solutions in order to
deliver rich financial line of sight, we estimate that less than 5% have proven successful.
Packaged solutions addressing various aspects of operational planning on the same
platform as FP&A.
■
A range of “starter kits” that assist customers in rapidly constructing their own
platform-resident operational planning models and applications.
■
Enhanced integrated financial planning (IFP) going beyond basic connectivity to,
and integration of, data from third-party data sources by adding new capabilities
including modern APIs.
■

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 5 of 21
As a new approach to enterprise planning, the xP&A market is likely to become more
competitive as the cumulative technological impact of integrated financial management
applications supporting companywide planning processes become increasingly evident.
As it unfolds, some vendors may be challenged to make R&D investments that will be
necessary to expand their footprint. Additionally, it is likely that new entrants may, at some
future point, join the xP&A market from outside the world of finance.
Through 2021, we expect cloud xP&A to be enabled by both BOB planning and ERP suite
vendors delivering various degrees of integrated planning capability. Vendors supporting
xP&A are expected to increasingly incorporate more specialized planning functionalities
and use cases that go beyond support for IFP alone (see Magic Quadrant for Cloud
Financial Planning and Analysis Solutions) as currently found in cloud FP&A solutions.
Examples include operational workforce planning such as headcount management,
budget and forecasting, and sales planning and forecasting related to territory, quota and
incentive management. Some vendors have already or plan to introduce support for sales
and operations planning (S&OP) to help continuously align supply chain and financial
plans. In the HCM area, new investments may be considered to support both strategic as
well as operational workforce planning (see Workforce Planning — How to Use
Technology to Support Planning Processes).
Market Analysis
There is no “one size fits all” approach to enterprise planning that suits every
organization. xP&A is only the latest approach for achieving enterprise planning.
Integrated business planning (IBP) provides a more mature, product-centric, operational
approach for consolidating operational planning processes and aligning them with
enterprise strategy. As such, IBP focuses on supply, demand, product and financial data.
Planning solutions don’t have to reside on the same platform and, given the supply chain
nature of the approach, may also span multiple enterprises. As a finance approach, xP&A
attempts to deliver those benefits by consolidating enterprise planning applications on a
single vendor platform, wherever possible, integrating with third-party solutions only as
required (see Innovation Insight for Extended Planning and Analysis [xP&A]).
Both IBP and xP&A approaches should be considered as two sides of the same coin
addressing a common objective — the continuous alignment of enterprise financial and
operational plans. xP&A is able to coexist along with IBP and vice versa, and they can be
mutually supportive of one another. xP&A simply adds another tool to the enterprise
planning “toolbox.” Those serving the xP&A market will find their most receptive audience
among organizations using cloud FP&A and those that are prioritizing business partnering
and enterprise planning as part of digital transformation efforts.

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 6 of 21
As this solution market evolves, it’s important to be mindful that operational planning
solutions offered by FP&A vendors may not be as robust as BoB planning application
counterparts. Strict evaluations should be performed to ascertain the depth and breadth
of current xP&A capabilities and vendor plans, with particular attention paid to areas such
as data governance and master data management.
Gartner expects xP&A platforms and architecture to continue to evolve, creating new
enterprise performance management opportunities where none previously existed. As an
early maturity market with development planned over the next decade, cloud xP&A is
evolving across three solution categories with FP&A vendors offering the following
attributes:
Due to the current state of market maturity, vendor offerings and emphasis may fall into
one or the other of these three solution categories depending on the operational planning
solution under consideration. As IFP is enhanced as part of xP&A it will act as a
transitional “bridge” enabling users to further pivot to this new and more comprehensive
financial approach to enterprise planning.
For this Market Guide, vendor operational planning offerings have been segmented across
HR/workforce, sales, S&OP, marketing and IT planning disciplines. Some vendors may
offer capabilities in one or more, but not all operational planning areas, and the breadth
and depth of functionality associated with each may also vary across the competitive
marketplace. Finally, vendors are also segmented by primary regional coverage and
targeted size of enterprise.
Fully packaged and marketed “turn key” operational planning applications, sharing
the same platform and common data model enabling both the consolidation and
integration of the solutions.
■
“Starter kits” that consist of templates, configurators/accelerators, data models,
connectors, business logic, prescriptive reference architectures, etc., capable of
improving the ability to construct and quickly deploy operational planning
applications on a shared platform.
■
Enhanced IFP capabilities that deliver quicker and easier integration with third-party
data sources via APIs and connections along with improvements in data
governance, process orchestration, rules and mapping techniques. These techniques
may include master data management and security that support the ability to pull
larger, more granular datasets into the platform for modelling and planning purposes
associated with xP&A.
■

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 7 of 21
Representative Vendors
The vendors listed in this Market Guide do not imply an exhaustive list. This section is
intended to provide more understanding of the market and its offerings.
Market Introduction
The market for financial close solutions comprises many providers. The representative
vendors of the market are shown in Table 1 which indicates the capabilities described in
the Market Description and Analysis sections above.
Table 1: Representative Vendors in Cloud Extended Planning and Analysis (xP&A)
(Enlarged table in Appendix)

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 8 of 21
Vendor Profiles
Anaplan
Anaplan introduced its xP&A capability, Connected Planning, back in 2017. Typical
customers are large and global enterprises with complex, cross-functional planning needs,
with requirements for aligning financial and operational plans to accelerate revenue
growth, expand margins, optimize assets and manage risk. Organizations venture into
Anaplan’s ecosystem through corporate and business unit FP&A as well as demand,
capacity, S&OP, commercial revenue and workforce planning, or sales performance
management. Anaplan supports both IFP and IBP. Customers using Anaplan to integrate
and align financial and operational plans include Hitachi Automotive Systems, Del Monte
and Zillow Group.
Anaplan’s solutions are powered by a unified collaborative platform enabling plans to be
built, modeled and shared using financial and operational data. Its solutions bring
together people, data and plans, while integrating with other enterprise systems, enabling
collaborative planning with Anaplan as a single source of truth. Prepackaged planning
solutions are available for finance, sales, marketing, supply chain, workforce and IT.
Anaplan continues to invest in predictive and intelligent forecasting, data integration and
extensibility, collaboration and user experience (UX), and multiple public cloud offerings.
Future capabilities include increased data and process orchestration, advanced predictive
analytics, business process automation, increased solution composability, and other
autonomous capabilities.
Board
Board’s xP&A solution enables enterprises to align financial and operational planning as
well as analytics in a single holistic process. It includes long-term strategic planning and
scenario management, detailed operational budgets and forecasts, S&OP, financial
planning and reporting as well as a collaborative approval process. Customers using
Board to integrate and align financial and operational plans include Coca-Cola European
Partners, Toyota Motor Europe and Puma.

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 9 of 21
Board Integrated Business Planning (IBP) extends FP&A principles to operational
departments, bringing together cross functional data to generate collaborative sales,
demand, procurement and HR planning with a common goal. It works with other Board
solutions consisting of accelerators for areas such as sales performance management,
workforce planning and analytics, FP&A and digital boardroom. It’s integration with other
Board Solutions is intended to create a unified planning and analytics process that breaks
down functional silos and enforces consensus-based decision making.
Recent Board investments include the addition of next generation unbalanced hierarchies,
50+ prebuilt connectors, a fully renewed set of REST APIs and a central hub for user
security and authorizations. Future initiatives will include new proprietary AI/ML
algorithms, AI-suggested data modeling, unstructured data analytics and investments in
distributed architecture.
CALUMO
CALUMO’s (XP&A) applications provide reporting, budgeting, forecasting and planning
capabilities for enterprises across both financial and operational data. xP&A
implementations solve problems and unique customer challenges using an agile project
framework that results in user-driven plans and models. CALUMO ships with models for
human capital management, operating expenditure (OPEX) and capital expenditure
(CAPEX) planning.
Reports, dashboards and planning templates can be authored in Microsoft Excel and
published to the web for simple distribution and interactive consumption. Users can also
embed connected reports in Word and PowerPoint documents allowing rapid creation of
board packs and presentations. Customers using CALUMO to integrate and align financial
and operational plans include Arts Centre Melbourne, Acumentis and Mainbrace
Constructions, all based in Australia.
CALUMO has prebuilt connectors for several popular on-premises and cloud-based
operational systems and ERP’s. These connectors have been designed specifically for
xP&A workloads and the consolidation of disparate data sources. The authoring and
modelling functionality, combined with the connector suite, and agile delivery framework
means implementation is completed rapidly.
CALUMO has experience delivering XP&A solutions to clients across all verticals from the
mid-market to large enterprise and government. CALUMO recently announced that it was
acquired by insightsoftware in July 2021.

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 10 of 21
IBM
IBM Planning Analytics with Watson is an AI-powered solution that streamlines and
integrates financial and operational planning. Integrated planning capabilities enable
business units to participate in a continuous, automated, measured and real-time adjusted
planning process. Customers using IBM’s solution to integrate and align financial and
operational plans include Ancestry, L’Oréal and Uber.
IBM Planning Analytics with Watson extends planning and analysis capabilities from
finance to sales, supply chain, HR, etc., integrating plans and data and creating a holistic
view of an organization’s performance. It uses IBM TM1, an in-memory database and
calculation engine capable of multidimensional analysis — across large, historical and
future oriented datasets — and real-time data access across multiple data sources.
Planning Analytics provides both a web-based and Excel interface, offering users the
flexibility to access and use a full set of capabilities in the user interface (UI) of their
choice. Future plans include:
Jedox
Jedox is a unified platform supporting xP&A that includes integrated financial planning,
Jedox Sales Planning and Jedox HR Planning as packaged solutions deployed as SaaS
or private cloud. Jedox is used by upper mid-market to large businesses and enterprises in
the manufacturing, life science, retail, food and beverage, consumer goods, media and
services industries. Customers across North America, EMEA and Asia/Pacific using Jedox
to integrate and align financial and operational plans include Siemens Healthineers
(Varian), Comcast and ABB.
Predictive forecasting enhancements that put the power of algorithmic forecasting
in the hands of line of business (LOB) users.
■
New accelerators that further extend planning and analysis capabilities across the
organization.
■
Integration with IBM’s CPLEX optimization engine so organizations can factor in
competing goals and priorities and explore various scenarios to arrive at the best
possible outcomes.
■

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 11 of 21
Jedox’s xP&A offering consists of a platform which is architected to enable non-technical
users to quickly build modular solutions for integrated planning. It offers prepackaged
planning solutions for finance, sales planning and workforce planning. Template-based
starter-kits for S&OP are provided by Jedox partners on the Jedox Marketplace.
Recent Jedox investments include reporting and ecosystem connectivity, adding mobile-
friendly dashboarding and self-service reporting, a native live data connection for
Salesforce and other third-party business intelligence (BI) and analytics tools. Jedox also
added models to its AIssisted Planning engine for automated and accurate predictions,
simulations and data preparation based on ML algorithms. Future plans include
improving platform scalability and flexibility as well as expanding its portfolio of xP&A
and operational planning solutions.
insightsoftware
insightsoftware offers two planning products that align and incorporate financial and
operational reporting: Bizview focusing on the needs of the midmarket, and Tidemark for
enterprise customers with complex modeling needs. Customers using these solutions to
integrate and align financial and operational plans include the Swedish baker Almondy,
London Internet Exchange (LINX) and Dalakraft.
insightsoftware offers a single platform that supports operations and finance for
accurate, integrated plans. Both products provide integrated reporting, dashboards and
analytics and enable users to plan at a granular level across demand plans, CAPEX plans,
labor plans, etc., without losing level of detail. Both also enable reference planning
numbers from any model as an input to another model (e.g., to integrate operational
planning data into financial plans).
Future plans include enabling more self-service functionality via templates that are
capable of supporting broader operational use cases, and that can be easily adapted by
users as required. Additionally it is looking to enhance data visualizations in order to
support business leaders across the organization.

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 12 of 21
OneStream
OneStream’s Intelligent Finance Platform unifies financial and operational planning,
financial close and consolidation, and reporting and analytics in a single solution —
enabling perspectives on both finance and operations from the same data. The unified
platform (and data model) includes a number of key capabilities designed to support
xP&A, including support for planning at a granular, business-driver level on dynamic data
with multidimensional analysis and automatic alignment to financials. OneStream
customers using the solution to integrate and align financial and operational plans
include Guardian Industries, KLM Group and Capital One.
OneStream’s platform provides support for financial close and consolidation, planning,
budgeting, forecasting, reporting and analytics, financial signaling and financial data
quality. The platform can be extended with over 50 other supported solutions from the
OneStream MarketPlace that include people planning, sales planning, capital planning,
cash planning and predictive analytics.
OneStream recently added high performance aggregations to speed planning on large
volumes of data and plans to add several new capabilities to further support xP&A
including improved ad hoc modeling capabilities and a guided ML experience. This will
give finance and LOB teams the power to leverage ML models without the support of data
scientists.
Oracle
Oracle Fusion Cloud Enterprise Performance Management’s connected planning
capabilities address xP&A via packaged applications, configurable solutions and solution
templates. Packaged applications include Sales Planning and Strategic Workforce
Planning. As a configurable solution, IT Financial Management is available free of cost.
Less prescriptive solution templates are offered for Integrated Business Planning and
Execution (IBPX) and marketing campaign planning. Customers using Oracle Enterprise
Performance Management (Oracle EPM) to integrate and align financial and operational
plans include InvenSense, Pacific Life and Reckitt.
Oracle’s solutions deliver prebuilt data, master data and process/workflow connections
into Oracle Fusion Cloud Applications suites and support open standards and API’s for
integration with other systems. Packaged and configurable applications include:
Application model artifacts
■
Predefined support for operational use cases and planning scenarios
■

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 13 of 21
Future investments include strengthening embedded AI, ML and predictive analytics, and
deeper prebuilt data, master data and workflow connections into operational sales,
marketing, HR and supply chain systems for easy integration with Oracle Fusion Cloud
Applications and other solutions. Support for industry-specific operational planning use
cases and more platform capabilities to support operational planning requirements will
also be added.
Planful
Planful’s Continuous Planning platform supports financial and operational planning and
helps compress planning cycle times in a connected and collaborative manner to
underpin xP&A. The platform supports supply chain teams, operational finance and sales
through a calculation engine, flexible dimensionality, excel formulas and native financial
intelligence — enabling users to plan at any level of granularity. Customers using Planful
to integrate and align financial and operational plans include Five Guys, Lube-Tech and
Stoli Group USA.
In 2020, Planful launched expanded Workforce Planning capabilities to enhance decision
making and collaboration between Finance and HR teams. Real-time employee data can
flow across the platform and the solution creates out-of-the-box calculations for standard
compensation costs for HR users while mapping back to the general ledger (GL) line item
for financial transparency.
Planful recently added a new visual experience where users can interact with employee-
level expense information when planning their future workforce, making it easier to update
information and modify compensation expense assumptions. Future platform
investments include rolling out more complementary operational templates and
capabilities to help customers analyze large data volumes faster and deliver cross-
functional insight into plans and continued flexibility in the UI to support these additional
use cases.
Prebuilt integration with Oracle Fusion Cloud Applications
■
Open interfaces for integration
■
Prebuilt reports, analytics and dashboards
■

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 14 of 21
SAP
As the analytics and planning layer of SAP’s Business Technology Platform, SAP
Analytics Cloud (SAC) combines BI, predictive analytics and enterprise planning in one
app. SAC’s analytical capabilities are embedded within SAP Cloud enterprise apps such as
SAP S/4HANA Cloud and SAP SuccessFactors Human Experience Management Suite.
From a planning perspective, SAC is integrated with the aforementioned as well as SAP
Integrated Business Planning (SAP IBP) for Supply Chain, enabling financial and
operational data to be shared in one platform. Connections capabilities allow access to
third- party sources and systems. Customers using SAC to integrate and align financial
and operational plans include Kärcher, National Vision and Aço Cearense Group.
xP&A is addressed by offering customers a real-time, seamless view of financial and
operational data across other applications. SAC also provides “Business Content”; best-
practice, packaged planning content and scenarios by LOB and industries.
SAP recently introduced a new SAC model type that links planning models within SAC to
applications across SAP for better integration and performance. This enables continued
integration and connectivity with other parts of SAP’s suite and business applications,
allowing further operational planning within SAC and strengthening its ability to offer
strategic, operational and financial planning together in a single solution.
Solver
Solver offers integration that brings in historical data from source systems to be used in
the planning process. Once configured, the Solver Data Warehouse and input form/report
designer supports planning models across any financial and operational area. Customers
using Solver to integrate and align financial and operational plans include Distribution
Management, Ducks Unlimited and Prattco.
Solver consists of planning/workflow, reporting/process management, dashboarding and
data warehouse modules supporting up to 100 data dimensions. Its single cloud
database approach and menu-driven setup enables companies to decide how broad or
detailed their planning model should be. Using the workflow engine, the FP&A team can
deploy top-down and/or bottom-up processes combining operational planning input with
summary data posted automatically to GL accounts in the corporate financial
templates/model.

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 15 of 21
Solver continues to invest in a template and process-driven approach where customers
can combine financial and operational planning needs with rapid time to value
deployments, using predefined templates and operational integrations built in partnership
with ERP vendors. It is also extending the planning process backward into strategy to
drive the overall direction of the planning process, and to ensure that users’ planning input
is aligned with corporate strategy.
Unit4
Unit4 FP&A focuses on people and project-centric industries, namely professional
services, public sector, not-for-profit organizations and higher education. While Unit4 FP&A
can be utilized stand-alone, it supports native integration with Unit4 ERP, its web-based,
cloud-native ERP, with predefined planning applications for workforce planning and people
analytics, as well as IFRS 16 and financial and statutory consolidation. Customers using
Unit4 FP&A to integrate and align financial and operation planning include Migros Aare,
WSP and University of Applied Sciences Vienna.
Prebuilt planning applications include an ERP and FP&A component, reducing time for
users to get up and running. One standard interface allows users to switch between ERP
and FP&A. The system is also adaptable for those requiring a tailored solution. Integration
between FP&A and ERP, including HCM and Professional Services Automation, includes
user and permissions synchronization, master data and push back of final planning data
from FP&A to the ERP system.
Future xP&A investments include embedding objects from FP&A directly into ERP. Planned
at the industry model level are predefined interfaces in both ERP and FP&A that represent
financial, people and project planning, to ensure continuous alignment between finance
and operational plans.
Vena
Vena Complete Planning is a cloud-native platform leveraging an Excel interface to plan
and streamline finance-led and extended planning processes. Its platform consists of
three configurations: Finance-Led Planning, Extended Planning and Beyond Planning.
Vena integrates to cloud, on-premises and other external databases or flat files using API
connectors, Microsoft Power Automate and extract transform and load (ETL) integration.
Customers using Vena’s solution to integrate and align financial and operational plans
include Metro Supply Chain Group, Coca-Cola Consolidated and Meats by Linz.

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 16 of 21
Vena connects people, departments, processes and systems into a central database so
organizations can plan across the business using unified data. Businesses get at-a-glance
visuals of key financial and operational company metrics to drive strategic decision
making and uncover hidden dependencies between xP&A use cases including workforce
planning, sales planning, capex, marketing, among others.
Recent investments include a new modeler interface and optimized UX providing
standardized dimensions that support multicube, embedded Microsoft Power BI,
integration APIs and a Microsoft 365 UX. Vena is moving beyond just financial planning
by delivering additional preconfigured, prescriptive xP&A applications for business, built
on a foundation consisting of templates, data models, connectors and business logic
customized to the specific needs and industry requirements of companies.
Workday
Workday Adaptive Planning is a scalable, cloud enterprise planning platform for
enterprisewide planning supporting financial, workforce, sales, demand and project
planning. Workday Adaptive Planning can also be used in non-Workday environments.
Demand and operational planning templates are available on the Workday Marketplace
and directly through partners. Some example customers using Workday Adaptive
Planning to integrate and align financial and operational planning include Rubrik, Jackson
Family Wines and Airbus.
Workday Adaptive Planning supports driver-based planning with unlimited scenario
modeling and ML-powered forecasting. Its federated, composable planning architecture
enables each function to have its own planning environment while preserving the ability to
align individual plans up to a holistic plan. Workday’s high-volume data hub (purchased
separately), can be leveraged to create data-infused models supporting both strategic and
detailed operational plans. Workday approaches xP&A through an industry lens, working
with software partners to deliver faster time to value. Prescriptive financial and
operational planning solutions are available for software and technology, non-profit,
healthcare, professional and business services, manufacturing, retail, financial services
and life sciences.
Workday’s future investments in xP&A include additional applications for specific
industries and extending market leadership in workforce planning with further depth in
skills-based planning.

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 17 of 21
Wolters Kluwer (CCH Tagetik)
Wolters Kluwer provides CCH Tagetik Budgeting, Planning and Forecasting which can be
configured and extended for financial and operational planning. Powered by the Analytic
Information Hub, the CCH Tagetik solution connects financial, operational and external
data with all plans combining summary level financial planning with granular operational
planning. The data hub supports unlimited dimensions, measures and complex
calculations. CCH Tagetik Predictive Intelligence, an out-of-the box predictive planning
solution interconnects data and identifies trends, ranks key business drivers, and provides
the best predictive plan. Customers using CCH Tagetik for financial and operational
planning include Members 1st Federal Credit Union and Discovery Education.
CCH Tagetik Smart NOW cloud planning apps can be implemented as prepackaged stand-
alone, turnkey or solution accelerators with prebuilt templates, calculations and reports.
Current solutions include workforce planning, production cost planning and control
(including sales planning for manufacturing), capital planning, cash flow planning and
risk adjusted planning.
Investment plans include more use cases, prepackaged accelerators and predictive
analytics for xP&A. Wolters Kluwer recently acquired Vanguard Software, a provider of
predictive planning software for production planning, supply and demand planning, sales
and operations planning and integrated business planning, further increasing its xP&A
footprint in the North American market.
Market Recommendations
The xP&A market represents an emerging finance-centric approach to enterprise planning
extending beyond current cloud FP&A solutions. It is most suitable to organizations
currently using or evaluating cloud FP&A solutions that seek to extend planning
capabilities enterprisewide, including adding or integrating with various types and levels
of operational planning requirements.
As an FP&A application leader responsible for considering xP&A, you should:
Determine your organization’s readiness for xP&A by analyzing current planning
processes and maturity levels. A mature, well governed FP&A process that currently
incorporates IFP will be a prerequisite for successful xP&A.
■

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 18 of 21
While xP&A is compelling and attractive, at the current stage of market maturity other
approaches and technologies may deliver better results and should also be considered
and evaluated. xP&A is an “up and coming” approach for enterprise planning to be
weighed on its merits alongside those that already currently exist.
Perform a cost-benefit analysis focusing special attention on “touchpoints” between
operational and financial planning processes where financial line of sight, shared
data, increased collaboration and alignment with key performance indicators (KPIs)
could improve planning accuracy using examples stated earlier.
■
Review the impact that adoption will have on change management as technology by
itself often cannot overcome cultural barriers to planning collaboration that need to
be addressed (see 5 “Must Have” Finance Skills Required for Post-COVID-19
Business Success). Meet with all associated stakeholders to build consensus and
ascertain if the organization has the fortitude to embrace a finance approach to
enterprise planning.
■
Assemble a business case and strategic roadmap that ensures all planning model
characteristics are accounted for and seek executive approval. Improvement
opportunities should be based on levels of importance, risk and potential ROI versus
the current state.
■
Evaluate vendor offerings, associated costs, and key elements such as data
governance, and master data management with vigilance due to the emerging and
immature nature of this market. Use this Market Guide to identify worthy candidates
and as a primer to holding vendor discussions about capabilities and future plans.
■

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 19 of 21
Acronym Key and Glossary Terms
AIartificial intelligence
BIbusiness intelligence
BoBbest of breed
FP&Afinancial planning and analysis
GLgeneral ledger
IBPintegrated business planning
IFPintegrated financial planning
LOBline of business
MLmachine learning
S&OPsales and operations planning
xP&Aextended planning and analysis
Evidence
Gartner’s Extended Planning & Maturity Analysis Survey, 2021 was conducted online from
17 March through 8 April 2021, to set the stage for the evolution of Gartner’s research into
enterprisewide planning capabilities.
In total, 82 ITL leaders responded to the survey. Respondents include 24 members from
Gartner’s ITL Research Circle, a Gartner managed panel and 58 ITL leaders from an
external sample.
The survey was developed collaboratively by a team of Gartner analysts and was
reviewed, tested and administered by Gartner’s Research Data Analytics team.
Note 1
Representative Vendor Selection
This Market Guide includes representative vendors in the FP&A market that seek to
leverage xP&A by extending their offerings to integrate and align financial and operational
plans.

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 20 of 21
Vendors vary by solution depth, breadth, geographical focus and the sizes of enterprise
targeted. i
Gartner identified vendors discussed during inquiry calls with Gartner clients seeking and
discussing xP&A capabilities. Those vendors were invited to participate in this research.
The list of vendors in this report is not exhaustive.
Note 2
Gartner’s Initial Market Coverage
This Market Guide provides Gartner’s initial coverage of the xP&A market and focuses on
the market definition, rationale for the market and market dynamics, in addition to
representative vendors.
Recommended by the Authors
Some documents may not be available as part of your current Gartner subscription.
Innovation Insight for Extended Planning and Analysis (xP&A)
Shift to a Composable Architecture to Transform Your Financial Management Systems
How Should I Select and Implement a Financial Planning and Analysis Solution?
Magic Quadrant for Cloud Financial Planning and Analysis Solutions
Critical Capabilities for Cloud Financial Planning and Analysis Solutions
Workforce Planning — How to Use Technology to Support Planning Processes

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 21 of 21
© 2021 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Gartner is a registered trademark of
Gartner, Inc. and its affiliates. This publication may not be reproduced or distributed in any form
without Gartner's prior written permission. It consists of the opinions of Gartner's research
organization, which should not be construed as statements of fact. While the information contained in
this publication has been obtained from sources believed to be reliable, Gartner disclaims all warranties
as to the accuracy, completeness or adequacy of such information. Although Gartner research may
address legal and financial issues, Gartner does not provide legal or investment advice and its research
should not be construed or used as such. Your access and use of this publication are governed by
Gartner’s Usage Policy. Gartner prides itself on its reputation for independence and objectivity. Its
research is produced independently by its research organization without input or influence from any
third party. For further information, see "Guiding Principles on Independence and Objectivity."

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 1A of 2A
Table 1: Representative Vendors in Cloud Extended Planning and Analysis (xP&A)
VendorWorkforce
Planning
Sales
Performance
Planning
Integrated
Business/
S&OP Planning
Marketing
Planning
IT
Planning
Primary
Regions
Serviced
Primary
Targeted
Enterprise
Size
 AnaplanxP&A
1
xP&A
1
xP&A
1
xP&A
1
xP&A
1
NAM, EMEA,
APAC
L,G
 BoardxP&A
2
xP&A
2
xP&A
2
IFPIFPEMEA, NAM,
APAC
UM,L,G
 CALUMOxP&A
2
IFPIFPIFPIFPANZ, NAMLM, UM
 JedoxxP&A
1
xP&A
1
xP&A
2
IFPIFPEMEA, NAM,
APAC
UM,L
 IBMxP&A
2
xP&A
2
xP&A
2
xP&A
2
xP&A
2
NAM, EMEA,
APAC, LATAM
L, G
 insightsoftwareIFPIFPIFPIFPIFPNAM, EMEALM, UM, L, G
 OneStreamxP&A
1
xP&A
1
IFPIFPIFPNAM, EMEAUM,L,G
 OraclexP&A
1
xP&A
1
xP&A
2
xP&A
2
xP&A
1
NAM, EMEA,
APAC, LATAM
UM,L,G
 PlanfulxP&A
1
xP&A
2
xP&A
2
IFPIFPNAM, EMEALM, UM, L
 SAPxP&A
2
IFPxP&A
1
IFPIFPEMEA, NAM,L, G

Gartner, Inc. | G00739810Page 2A of 2A
Source: Gartner (July 2021)
APAC, LATAM
 SolverIFPIFPIFPIFPIFPNAM, EMEALM
 Unit4xP&A
2
xP&A
2
IFPIFPIFPEMEALM,UM
 VenaxP&A
1
xP&A
1
IFPIFPIFPNAMUM,L,G
 Wolters Kluwer
(CCH Tagetik)
xP&A
1
xP&A
1
xP&A
1
IFPIFPEMEA, NAM,
APAC
UM,L,G
 WorkdayxP&A
1
xP&A
2
xP&A
2
IFPIFPNAM, EMEA,
APAC
UM,L,G
Footnote
1-Fully packaged and marketed xP&A “turn key” operational planning applications
sharing the same platform and common data model enabling both the consolidation and integration of the solutions. Depth and breadth of operational
planning applications vary by vendor.
2-xP&A “Starter Kits”
that consist of templates, configurators/accelerators, data models, connectors, business logic, prescriptive reference architectures, etc., to help construct
and deploy operational planning applications on a shared platform.
IFP= Enhanced IFP capabilities
that deliver quicker and easier integration with third-party data sources via APIs and connections along with improvements in data governance, process
orchestration, rules and mapping techniques and security that support the ability to pull larger, more granular datasets into the platform for modelling and
planning purposes associated with xP&A.
Primary Regions Serviced: NAM= North America, EMEA=Europe and Middle Eastern Area, APAC= Asia/Pacific, LATAM=Latin America
Primary Target Enterprise Size: LM= Lower-Midmarket ($50-250M), UM=Upper-Midmarket ($250M-1B), L=Large Enterprise ($1-5B), G=Global Enterprise
($5B+).